content/docs/js/this.mdx, before:

---
title: This
description: What the fuck is this?!
---

How

`this` value for a function is determined by how the function are called.

### Objects

In the example below `this` will point to globalThis, In browser globalThis is `window` and in node globalThis is `global`

```js
var point = {
  x: null,
  y: null,

  init(x, y) {
    this.x = x
    this.y = y
  },
  toString() {
    return `(${this.x},${this.y})`
  },
}

const init = point.init
init(3, 4)
console.log("output: ", point.toString())
// output: (null,null)

console.log("x: ", x)
// x: 3
// Variable x and y is created ??!!

console.log("this: ", this)
//this: Window {window: Window, self: Window, document: document, name: '', location: Location, …}
```

```js
"use strict"

var point = {
  // ...
}

const init = point.init
init(3, 4)
// TypeError: Cannot set properties of
// undefined (setting 'x')

console.log("this: ", this)
// this: undefined
```

This is proper way to do it

```js
var point = {
  // ...
}

const init = point.init
init.call(point, 3, 4)
// or: init.apply( point, [ 3, 4 ] )

point.x // 3
point.y // 4
```

So now you can borrow a function reference.

```js
var point = {
  // ...
}

point.init(3, 4)

var anotherPoint = {}
point.init.call(anotherPoint, 5, 6)

// or you can do this

var similarPoint = {
  init: point.init,
  toString: point.toString,
}
similarPoint.init(7, 8)

point.x // 3
point.y // 4
anotherPoint.x // 5
anotherPoint.y // 6
similarPoint.x // 7
similarPoint.y // 8
```

There is another way to use function from antoher object. You can use keyword `new`.

```js
var point = {
  init: function () {
    /* .. */
  },
}

var anotherPoint = new point.init(3, 4)

anotherPoint.x // 3
anotherPoint.y // 4
```

`new` keyword hijacks a function and forces its behavior into a different mode than a normal invocation. Here are the 4 special steps that JS performs when a function is invoked with new:

1. create a brand new empty object, out of thin air.
2. link the `[[Prototype]]` of that new empty object to the function's .prototype object
3. invoke the function with the `this` context set to that new empty object.
4. if the function doesn't return its own object value explicitly (with a return .. statement), assume the function call should instead return the new object

**Step 4 implies that if you new invoke a function that does return its own object, like `return { .. }`, etc, then the new object from steps 1-3 is not returned.**

```js
// alternative to:
//   var anotherPoint = new point.init(3,4)

var anotherPoint
// this is a bare block to hide local
// `let` declarations
{
  // (Step 1)
  let tmpObj = {}

  // (Step 2)
  Object.setPrototypeOf(tmpObj, point.init.prototype)
  // or: tmpObj.__proto__ = point.init.prototype

  // (Step 3)
  let res = point.init.call(tmpObj, 3, 4)

  // (Step 4)
  anotherPoint = typeof res !== "object" ? tmpObj : res
}
```

There are four rules for `this` context assignment in function calls:

1. Is the function invoked with `new`, creating and setting a new `this`?
2. Is the function invoked with `call(..)` or `apply(..)`, explicitly setting `this`?
3. Is the function invoked with an object reference at the call-site (e.g., `point.init(..)`), implicitly setting `this`?
4. If none of the above... are we in non-strict mode? If so, default the `this` to `globalThis`. But if in strict-mode, default the `this` to `undefined`.

These rules, in this order, are how JS determines the `this` for a function invocation. If multiple rules match a call-site (e.g., `new point.init.call(..)`), the first rule from the list to match wins.

### Arrow functions

---

If you wish to learn more about `this` subject, follow these links:

https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/2nd-ed/objects-classes/ch4.md

Commit message:

docs: update this in js

content/docs/js/this.mdx, after:

---
title: This
description: What the fuck is this?!
---

How

`this` value for a function is determined by how the function are called.

### Objects

In the example below `this` will point to globalThis, In browser globalThis is `window` and in node globalThis is `global`

```js
var point = {
  x: null,
  y: null,

  init(x, y) {
    this.x = x
    this.y = y
  },
  toString() {
    return `(${this.x},${this.y})`
  },
}

const init = point.init
init(3, 4)
console.log("output: ", point.toString())
// output: (null,null)

console.log("x: ", x)
// x: 3
// Variable x and y is created ??!!

console.log("this: ", this)
//this: Window {window: Window, self: Window, document: document, name: '', location: Location, …}
```

```js
"use strict"

var point = {
  // ...
}

const init = point.init
init(3, 4)
// TypeError: Cannot set properties of
// undefined (setting 'x')

console.log("this: ", this)
// this: undefined
```

This is proper way to do it

```js
var point = {
  // ...
}

const init = point.init
init.call(point, 3, 4)
// or: init.apply( point, [ 3, 4 ] )

point.x // 3
point.y // 4
```

So now you can borrow a function reference.

```js
var point = {
  // ...
}

point.init(3, 4)

var anotherPoint = {}
point.init.call(anotherPoint, 5, 6)

// or you can do this

var similarPoint = {
  init: point.init,
  toString: point.toString,
}
similarPoint.init(7, 8)

point.x // 3
point.y // 4
anotherPoint.x // 5
anotherPoint.y // 6
similarPoint.x // 7
similarPoint.y // 8
```

There is another way to use function from antoher object. You can use keyword `new`.

```js
var point = {
  init: function () {
    /* .. */
  },
}

var anotherPoint = new point.init(3, 4)

anotherPoint.x // 3
anotherPoint.y // 4
```

`new` keyword hijacks a function and forces its behavior into a different mode than a normal invocation. Here are the 4 special steps that JS performs when a function is invoked with new:

1. create a brand new empty object, out of thin air.
2. link the `[[Prototype]]` of that new empty object to the function's .prototype object
3. invoke the function with the `this` context set to that new empty object.
4. if the function doesn't return its own object value explicitly (with a return .. statement), assume the function call should instead return the new object

**Step 4 implies that if you new invoke a function that does return its own object, like `return { .. }`, etc, then the new object from steps 1-3 is not returned.**

```js
// alternative to:
//   var anotherPoint = new point.init(3,4)

var anotherPoint
// this is a bare block to hide local
// `let` declarations
{
  // (Step 1)
  let tmpObj = {}

  // (Step 2)
  Object.setPrototypeOf(tmpObj, point.init.prototype)
  // or: tmpObj.__proto__ = point.init.prototype

  // (Step 3)
  let res = point.init.call(tmpObj, 3, 4)

  // (Step 4)
  anotherPoint = typeof res !== "object" ? tmpObj : res
}
```

There are four rules for `this` context assignment in function calls:

1. Is the function invoked with `new`, creating and setting a new `this`?
2. Is the function invoked with `call(..)` or `apply(..)`, explicitly setting `this`?
3. Is the function invoked with an object reference at the call-site (e.g., `point.init(..)`), implicitly setting `this`?
4. If none of the above... are we in non-strict mode? If so, default the `this` to `globalThis`. But if in strict-mode, default the `this` to `undefined`.

These rules, in this order, are how JS determines the `this` for a function invocation. If multiple rules match a call-site (e.g., `new point.init.call(..)`), the first rule from the list to match wins.

### Arrow functions

Arrow functions differ in their handling of this: they inherit this from the parent scope at the time they are defined. This behavior makes arrow functions particularly useful for callbacks and preserving context. However, arrow functions do not have their own this binding. Therefore, their this value cannot be set by bind(), apply() or call() methods, nor does it point to the current object in object methods.

---

If you wish to learn more about `this` subject, follow these links:

https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/2nd-ed/objects-classes/ch4.md
